**must implement multiple mechanics using only analogue stick and single button**

1. exploration/strategy game switching between 2D/3D with button, joystick to move in 3D, act in 2D (like an action wheel)
2. puzzle game kinda styled after conway's game of life: player exists in a 2D grid, acting up, down, left, and right move you in different patterns (i.e. not just directly in those directions) and you have to combine patterns of movement. maybe you interact with the tiles differently? maybe you toggle something with the button? about how you interact with the tiles?
3. fighting game in 2D (or 3D maybe?) where joystick-button allows you to move, whereas button-joystick lets you act in some way, button-button lets you do something else
4. puzzle-fighting game where the player exists within a grid of nodes, can move between connected nodes with joystick-button, activate a node with button (different types of nodes could do different things, like changing which nodes are connected, rearranging nodes, interacting with whatever you're fighting), button-button uses some ability (joining nodes together?), hold-button-joystick has some other special action (destroy link between nodes)

i like idea 4 the most. suppose it was turn-based, with 'enemies' the player must escape from or remove, and this has to be done by navigating the network (using joystick-button) and cutting off segments of the network with hold-button-joystick. the player could forge new links to other nodes when necessary using button-button-joystick. different nodes might have different special abilities, for instance, some links could be inaccessible when the player is in state A, and by activating a particular node, the player is moved to state B, where some links become inactive and others become active (changing the playfield). this could be denoted by colour. maybe another node type allows the player to destroy enemies on connected nodes, but only once (after which the node becomes useless). this might be too large of a scope.