rhythm games babyyyy

need to consider:
- bpm
- time signature
- latency between input and sound/display/calculation
- note types
- quantization, aligning 'beat events' with beats in the audio
- charting and storing the data for the notes etc

most rhythm games use a highway, notes appear at the far end, they travel toward the judgement line where the action needs to occur. the more accurate to the middle of the line the note is when the action is pressed, the higher the score.

when spawning notes, you need to consider the bpm of the song, how far ahead we're looking, how long it takes the note to reach the judgement line AND the framerate.

audio data is sent to speakers in chunks so we need to make sure the audio device has sufficient buffered data to play.

spawn the note early to account for spawning time, so you have it waiting to fly when the audio time is right.

many games adapt for latency by making you interact to a beat from both visual and audio stimuli in order to calibrate the latency on both.

when chart is saved, the offset of a beat should be stored as the number of samples since the song has started, not the time (due to rounding errors).

in order to eliminate problems with performance drops or delta time errors affecting synchronicity, you should track the number of samples that should have happened since the start of the music (i.e. an absolute offset, rather than frame-by-frame relative ones).

## clone hero
guitar hero clone, support for community charts. the classic highway format with a physical guitar controller.
clone hero is a free clone version with any bindings.

## beat saber
vr game with the highway format. use a sword to cut notes as they arrive. you also get extra points for being fluid and performing/dancing with the notes more. notes are arranged with inertia in mind. also supports community levels. also it looks fucking SICK.

## metal hellsinger
fps fighter but you get extra points/damage for doing actions on the beat of the music.

## hi-fi rush
fighting game where the music is built around you and your action. the world moves with your rhythm. your actions are quantized to the beats.

## thumper
i dont even know how to describe this. it looks really cool. it focusses on polyrhythms.

## timing mechanics
lots of games have some kind of rhythm. perfect timing is required for lots of souls-like games, but things like sekiro have and ghost of tsushima give you extra score/abilities for perfect parries.
active reload is a similar mechanic, reloading your gun gives you a quicktime event which helps you reload a little bit faster.
quicktime events are a major one, many games have them.
