## academic writing
interrogate your sources:
- why was it made?
- who made it?
- where do it's sources lead?
- is the context of the source and the context you're using it in the same? (i.e. specify the context)
- is the source lying? do they have another reason to be saying what they're saying?

finding information:
- every reinterpretation of a source means changing it. follow to the original source and interrogate it (i.e. read the documentation for a thing, not a youtube video about the documentation, same with wikipedia)
- unless you're doing original research, don't backfill. research and reference first, then write about those sources, don't only look for sources that confirm what you already think
- keep track of sources as you encounter them, why you saved them, how you rate them. then eliminate the worst ones and start building your dissertation from the good ones (does not need to be written in order)
- check further than the first solution to the problem. there may be better ways to do something, deeper contexts that you're missing
- use academically strong source materials, like peer reviewed journal articles, conference papers (sometimes textbooks), the honesty/confidence in these are easy to verify because they have been reviewed (theoretically) by academic experts in the specific field

PEIL:
- **P**oint - start with your point in plain, concise language, in a sentence or two
- **E**vidence - evidence your point using sources, potentially why you're referencing those specific sources
- **I**nterpret - interpret the evidence and how it's relevant to your point
- **L**ink - link the point and it's evidence back to the purpose of the paper

remember to reference your information:
- short form in text
- full form (Harvard) in your bibliography at the end/ends of pages
- citations are not counted towards word count

[https://libguides.staffs.ac.uk/library]
[https://citethisforme.com]

