intellectual property is just a thing which you made which can be protected as unique.

- copyrights (automatic rights given to the creator of a finished item)
- trademarks (verified trade 'names' which large market holders can secure to protect their products as being 'authentically *thing*')
- patents (protect inventors from the creation of an idea to its implementation)
- trade secrets (information specified by a company that may not be released publicly and which signing an NDA binds you to as an employee)

professional indemnity insurance will help protect you from large patent holders abusing patent similarity you didn't know about to steal money from you.

examples of this:
- nemesis system is a system from LoTR Middle Earth where persistent AI is used for unscripted character interactions to build story. Warner Brothers patented it to try and get money from anyone who implements similar systems (patents like this allow large companies to strong-arm smaller developers to control larger portions of the industry by litigating people out of existence for building similar ideas)
- dual-reality gameplay in The Medium where the player moves the character within two simultaneous spaces
- EA own the rights to the net deformation in FIFA
- CapCom used to own the rights to *any loading-screen game*, but not any more
- EA patented the 'ping system' in Apex, but have publicly said they won't enforce the patent and that others should use it to encourage accessible play. the patent specifically reveals the technical implementation

## routes to market
publishers for development you register with before the project is complete, they will have experts for hire and services for porting games between platforms. they will take a share of the IP and thus the right to make decisions on your IP, and will take money when you sell it. Examples are Coat Sink.

publishers for money you register any time but cost lots of money, they pay employee salaries and help advertising, they will take a profit share or IP share, and will take a larger profit share until they regain the return on their investment.

publishers for marketing you register at release, will help you make a splash with your initial game, and will be good if you want to just move on so you can just pass the game onto the publisher. they will take IP ownership and can do what they want.

for indie games, free money is everywhere. UK Games Fund, Indiecade, Creative England, Unreal Dev Grants, Silicon Stoke. there's also less free money, loans, which you'll have to pay back. sharing your game with streamers is a great idea, keymailer is a good tool to connect with streamers to give them free keys. stream it yourself, stream your development, reward streamers for playing your game and engage with them and the wider community.