agile is a dev methodology focused on lots of little bits of development in short segments.
projects are split into sprints which run in cycles:
1. planning
2. implementation
3. scrum/review
4. retrospect
you estimate the tasks you want to achieve in each sprint and how long they take, and record how long they actually take. each sprint has a goal, and as part of sprints, the team comes back together to review how things went (did everyone meet their goals, what goals need to be set for the next sprint).

when planning a sprint, you consult the product backlog (list of things that need doing). this backlog changes constantly, tasks might be added or removed, have their time/effort estimations revised, etc.

allows big projects to be broken down into smaller parts to be more manageable, and individual parts can be tackled one at a time.

helps you spread development and prevent extreme crunches close to deadlines. crunch means you planned or scoped badly.

burndown represents the progress of completing tasks according to the volume of 'effort points' assigned to them.

effort values are a way of quantifying the effort required to complete a task. they are pretty specific to each person, so *time taken* is a good metric for effort value. if in doubt, multiply by 2.1. difficulty doesn't always mean time-consuming. maybe you want to track both separately or something.

## tools

trello is a 'kanban' board. its good for tasks and product backlog tracking. works well with groups. you can get addons for tracking time and effort, etc. its free.

toggl track can be automated to track time spent on specific software to accurately assess exactly when and how long you're working on tasks for.

monday is just trello but even more fancy.

microsoft planner is built into teams. miro is also a microsoft thing.

mischief is a weird vector infinite canvas painting software.

decide when you work and when you stop.

## assessment 1

1 analogue stick, 1 button, multiple mechanics

look at these:
- De Mambo
- Dive Kick
- Canabalt
- N++
- Joust 1982

spend 3 weeks on the first prototype, then plan for the second over easter.
also probably look at the assessment documents.
plan it by wednesday.