**next game brief: simulating the mundane** (segmented garden world idea??? garden cleanup?)

design documents *might* contain:
- game loop
	- what does the player do?
	- how are they challenged?
	- what is the reward?
- win/lose conditions
- how game systems are made (without going into coding detail)
- mechanics
- UI wireframes
- concept art potentially

mechanic diagrams are important to convey information quickly. UML (Unified Modelling Language) allows you to express code structure with standardised symbols (i.e. not programming language specific). [mermaid.live](mermaid.live) is a good tool, but it's just a flowchart generator (it can do all sorts).

game UIs are heirarchical and can be described simply with just wireframes/boxes. a good idea is to learn from other people's UI designs ([wireframe.cc](wireframe.cc), [gameuidatabase.com](gameuidatabase.com)).

design documents don't have to be complete from the word go. they get built upon by different departments as games develop.

moon logic - be conscious of the mental jump the player needs to make to solve a puzzle (i.e. 'the designer already knows how to solve it because they designed it')

pillars - core ideas and concepts that you focus on during development which inform later decisions
## examples
- grim fandango's DD has flowcharts for how you can progress through the game, diagrams of room layouts, explanations for the puzzles
- monaco' DD starts with a very brief distilled summary of the idea of the game in terms of mechanics, goal, and appearance. it has a diagram showing the user's journey through the UI, as well as mechanics, specific levels
- rogue legacy's DD was created physically on paper
- street fighter 4's DD is only 17 pages despite being a big-budget game. has tables, mechanic diagrams, concept art. summary of game modes, fighting system
- monster knight's DD is an annotated concept art book and extremely unnecessarily fancy
- wipeout's DD is a wall of text

