version control tracks **changes** in files, rather than entire copies of files. these changes are tracked along a continuum called a **branch**.

`+change` represents an addition of a line
`-change` represents a deletion of a line
`~change` represents a change to a line

the **head** of a branch is the final section of the branch, with all the changes applied.

changes stored like this means its easy to see **diffs** and potentially find where problems occurred.

first you **pull changes** from the server, make your **commits** (which contain changes), then you **push** those commits back to your server (probably, depending on the thing, see below).

## branches and merging
different branches can be **merged** to apply their changes in a single combined head of the resulting branch. **merge conflicts** can occur when two changes conflict (i.e. changes to the same line), and these needs to be fixed when merging branches, though most can be auto-merged.

new branches represent copies of the ledger from a particular commit. you cannot merge things onto commits which branch, since this would leave dangling branches. *remember that the ledger represents a continuum of changes dependent on previous changes*.

usually the idea is to make a new branch each time you build a feature, make your various commits to your local copy, **rebase** those changes and **squash** them into a single commit (i.e. redo those changes so that they are relative to the current head of main, and combine them into a single commit), and then merge that via a **pull request**. before things get merged, other programmers, potentially many, will check the code and review the changes.

## models
may be **centralised** (a true version on the server, where objects can be checked in, 'i am working on this thing', things can be locked. commits are uploaded directly to the main server) or **distributed** (a true copy exists on each machine. commits can be made and merged back onto the server version when required leading to less chance you can break the whole project, more changes can be made at once, merge conflicts more likely, but less reliance on a central system).


## implementations
unity uses Plastic SCM. it has a nice GUI. has a hybrid localised/centralised/distributed approach. best to use it through the app and NOT through unity. has different workflows for programmers (Standard) and artists (Gluon).

perforce is the AAA version. it's entirely centralised. it looks horrible. its expensive. but it integrates with engines.

github is free. easy to use especially for small projects. public repo hosting on github. open model for workflows (shared and asynchronous). only limited by its poor support of large files, although this can be improved with github LFS (LFS can't merge big files).

## using git - cheatsheet for the commandline

// copy in from the slides

git-scm.com/download/win
git-scm.com/download/gui/windows

probably a good idea to use a mixture of command line and GUI tools. *beware that github desktop is fairly limited*. look into GitKraken and SourceTree.

first-time setup. `git config --global user.name "name"` and `git config -- global user.email person@domain.what`, also set your text editor with `git config --system core.editor notepad`. `system` is systemwide, `global` is user-wide.

`git init` initialises the repository and creates the `.git` folder. contains important stuff. probably don't fuck with this directly
`git clone https://repository.url` clones a repository from a url

before committing files, you need to **stage** changes. this lets you choose which files you want to stage for committing things.

`git status` explains the current status
`git add .` adds changed/untracked files in the current directory to the staging directory
`git rm --cached -r filename` remove a file from the staging directory
`git commit -m "commit message"` bundles those staged changes into a commit and pushes it into your local repository. 
`git branch -M main` tells git to rename the current branch to main
`git remote add origin https://repo.url` adds a remote link nicknamed origin linked to the repository
`git remote` lists remotes
`git push origin` pushes local commits to the remote called origin (you can also specify branch), you may need `--set-upstream the first time`
`git pull` pulls commits from the server
`git fetch` just checks for changes on the server

