## ethics in games
morality - the first order set of beliefs and practices about how to live a good life used to make decisions
ethics - second order conscious reflection on the adequacy of our moral beliefs and the reasoning behind our morality

divine command theories - 'follow your religion'
ethics of conscience - 'would i feel bad if i did this'
ethical egoism - 'look after number 1'
ethics of duty - 'do the right thing for X'
ethics of respect - 'respect others and their experiences'
ethics of rights - 'all people are created with inalienable rights'
utilitariansim - 'make the world a better place'
ethics of justice - 'that's not fair'
virtue ethics - 'be a good person'

these are all moral bases. ethics is the process of deciding which of these methodologies to use when making decisions.

moral or ethical dilemma - decision where both outcomes have negative outcomes, and choosing one or the other will have different consequences for different people
- the trolley problem - (do nothing and several people die, switch tracks and only one person dies)

## pathologic 2
- reputation determines how people behave around you
- should you use a healing item to save a townsperson in need?
- you get reputation by helping people in the area
- a thief steals from you, a cop sees you and shoots the thief and then steals your items from the thief. you should kill the pig. make him squeal

## papers please
- a woman pleads to be let through the border but her papers are wrong. if you reject her, she'll be sold into slavery
- thinking costs time
- letting her through loses you money
- if you let her through, then the next man will sell her into slavery, and he has correct papers, do you let him through too?
- you can detain people, but they are never seen again, but you get money every time you detain people, where do you draw the line?

PEGI (Pan European Game Information) is a recognised oversight org for ethics in games. they use content descriptors like
- bad language
- drugs
- fear
- gambling
- sex
- violence
- ingame purchases