data represents information a program works with, fundamental types are:
- bool - 1 byte
- int (signed and unsigned) - 4 bytes
- byte (aka uint8, char, short) - 1 byte
- pointer (including forming the base of an array) - 4 bytes
- float/double - 4 bytes/8 bytes
- long - 8 bytes

all data is stored in memory, data types tell the compiler and the program how to interpret the raw bytes stored in memory.

memory can be conceptualised as a long sequence of boxes, each of which is identified by an address, the whole block of addresses being called the address space. indexed from zero, not 1.

the number of spaces/bytes allocated to a datum depends on the size of the data type.

memory is not cleared upon allocation/deallocation, locations will contain junk data.

the two main regions of memory used are the stack and the heap. the stack fills from the bottom up, and contains mainly short-lived temporary variables, managed/garbage collected by the C environment. the heap contains larger allocated objects which we expect to persist for a longer period of time, managed by the program only.

data in memory should stay the same between it being accessed/written to.

variables represent identifiers for items in memory, they are a front-end label which links to the actual place in memory which holds the value 'contained' in the variable.
a layer of abstraction between the programmer and the hardware.
identifiers have to be unique within their scope/context, because each identifier refers to something unique.

C++ also supports constants, which cannot change and mainly exist as macros to avoid duplicating writing random magic numbers everywhere

variables are declared by specifying modifiers, data type, identifier, and optionally initial value:

`private int index = 5;`

identifiers start with a letter, contain letters, numbers, underscores, and may not be the same as keywords like `if`.

literals:
- int: `5`
- char: `'a'`
- string: `"hello"`
- float: `3.4f`

operators:
- `+`, `-`,`/`,`*`,`%` - mathematical
- `=`,`+=`,`-=`,`*=`,etc - assignment
- theres boolean and binary operators too

expressions are evaluated according to BIDMAS. but maybe use brackets just to make it extra clear