# Lighting Calculations
local illumination - lights primitives independent of one another (ignores other models and primitives)
global illumination - lighting objects with respect to one another (light bounces and is shadowed)

## Flat Shading
a point is selected on each primitive, the illumination is calculated, and the shading is interpolated across the facet. very simple

## Gouraud Shading
light calculated at each vertex, and the light is interpolated across the facet. problems when the triangles are not dense enough.

## Phong Shading
instead of interpolating the lighting, the lighting parameters are interpolated (e.g. normal) and the primitives are lit per-pixel. far better realism, allows for more interesting effects, but more costly.

## Illumination Model (Blinn-Phong by the sound of it)
ambient light - background light supposedly reflected/scattered by the scene
diffuse light - rough light bouncing off the surface
specular light - sharp highlights reflecting light which are view-angle dependent

blah blah RGB colour math, 0-1. 
## Solving the Shared Normal Problem
duplicate the vertices and split the normals per-face-corner. alternatively you could just set `nointerp` on the normal buffer (but you will only have flat shading, no smooth shading).

## Lambertian Reflection
light is more intense when it strikes a surface directly compared to when it strikes diagonally (surface area stuff). amount of light received is proportional to the angle between the normal and the light, using cosine (higher the angle between normal and light direction, the lower the strength).

we need to use `saturate(...)` to clamp the value of the dot product to 0-1.

we need normals to interpolate as directions, in world space.

## Specular Light
specular highlights depend on the angle between the view direction and the reflected ray of light. using dot product again. we then use an exponent to reduce the cone of reflection to make the highlight sharper (i.e. for more reflective/less diffuse surfaces).

by adding all the components together, we get Phong shading.

$$AmbientColour = AmbientLight * AmbientMaterial$$
$$DiffuseColour = DiffuseLight * DiffuseMaterial * Dot(Normal, -Direction)$$
$$SpecularColour = SpecularLight * SpecularMaterial * Dot(Reflect(View, Normal), -Direction)^{Exponent}$$

$$PhongLighting = AmbientColour + DiffuseColour + SpecularColour$$

## Positional Lighting
for now we've been assuming directional lights (i.e. like a sun lamp) which do not have a falloff. however we can also have point and spot lights. these both follow inverse square falloff. we have problems with division by zero when distance is zero, so we add an arbitrary value (or clamp it). point lights illuminate in all directions, spot lights illuminate in a specific direction/hemisphere.

lights are usually passed in a constant buffer (hence the limited number of lights that can affect any one object).