# post processing
FUCK YEAH

double buffering involves keeping a back buffer (which the GPU writes to while rendering) and a front buffer (which is displayed on the screen, and overwritten at regular periods based on the content of the backbuffer). this allows us to solve tearing problems by drawing the entire screen at once, and not showing anything from the new frame until we finish drawing the frame.

`Present` in DX11 swaps the two buffers. well, it should but DX11 by default actually copies one to the other.

a swap chain is a more complex way to do this, by having multiple back buffers so that we can draw an extra frame ahead of the CPU (triple buffering). in fact, we can have as many buffers as we want. **triple buffering is required for deferred rendering.**

render targets can be presented with old data. unless you overwrite/clear a pixel, it will contain old data.

post processing involves modifying the colour buffer after a scene has been rendered. often used to change the look and feel, apply special effects, etc.

usually the technique involves rendering a full screen quad, with a shader and the previous colour buffer bound as a texture resource. since render targets are just a special resource pointing to a texture, we can just make DX render to any old texture, then use that as an intermediate texture which we bind as a shader resource for post processing.

since your post processing is just a shader, you can do literally anything you want inside it! you can do multiple passes, you can pass in the depth texture as well.

SSAA - super sampling anti aliasing - just render each pixel multiple times, with slightly different sampling positions. average the resulting colours to get a much smoother (but more costly) result.