# HLSL and shaders
shaders are functions that operate on 3D data. the vertex shader will return a position (along with some other data usually) and is executed per vertex, while the fragment/pixel is executed on pixels/fragments and returns a colour (and potentially write to other buffers).

the programmer is responsible for performing vertex transformations (i.e. model->world->view->clip), and perform all the lighting, texturing, shading operations.

vertex attributes - position, colour, texcoord, which are set only per vertex.
uniform parameters - transformations, texture samplers, constants, which remain the same for the entire draw call.
varying parameters - transformed vertex info, interpolated colours, passed from vertex to pixel shader by interpolating per-vertex values across triangles.

all variables passed in/out/between shader stages need semantics, which describe what a parameter is intended to be used as. they are also used to identify stuff in C++ code, and to connect variables to data (like position buffers).

the `SV_` is short for system variable, which just means it needs to be returned in order to compile.

we use semantics to configure the input layout in C++ using an `D3D11_INPUT_ELEMENT_DESC`

the constant buffer is optimised for... doing exactly that. buffering constants. you pass in a structure which gets given to all the shaders.

constant buffers pack into 4-byte aligned chunks. individual data items cannot cross 16-byte boundaries. i.e. you cannot have a float5, you would need a float4 and float and combine them later.

HLSL is the D3D shading lang. similar to CG (NVIDIA's lang). as opposed to GLSL, OpenGL and Vulkan's lang, and PSSL, the playstation shader lang (based on CG and HLSL originally).

scalar values in HLSL: `bool`, `int`, `uint`, `float`,`double`. self explanatory, all 32-bit except double.

vector types: `float4`, `float3`, `vector<float, 4>`, `int3`, `float2`. can be initialised with mixed values (e.g. a `float4` can be initialised with a `float2` and two `float`s).

vector types can be accessed using `.r`, `.g`, `.b`, `.a`, or XYZW, or with combinations of those (e.g. `.yxw`) using swizzling. can be used for assignment too.

matrix types: `float2x2`, `float4x4`, `bool3x1`, etc. can be accessed with `._m00` or `._11` naming schemes (these two are the same values).

HLSL is not object oriented. recursion not supported, but does support `if`,`for`,`while`, `switch`.

pixel shaders support the `discard` keyword as an alternative to return to skip drawing that pixel.

has various math utils like dot, cross, normalize, sin, cos, abs, lerp, etc etc.

you can specify registers for data if you want to supply multiple constant blocks. `b0` for constants, something somethjing.

use renderdoc to debug stuff. it injects into the pipeline to visualise and debug what's happening in the rendering process.