# animation
jimmy jimmy my dude my slime

animation includes position, rotation, scale, shape change, etc changing over time.

lerp - linear interpolation f(a, b, t) = bt + (1-t)a
very useful function in both rendering and animation, when we use t=time
slerp - spherical linear interpolation. used for blending rotations (rather than vectors), using quaternions.

with 2d animation we can just use a sequence of sprites that we cycle through on a regular interval.

squash and stretch - bodies deform under pressure, during acceleration and collision, classic 2d make use of this to convey some life in animations

animating meshes is often done with keyframes (frames where there is defined data for positions etc) and shape keys, where vertex positions are blended between positions.
this has a large memory cost.

robot arm is the classic example of contrained, heirarchical motion. if the elbow rotates, everyrhing downstream of it moves with it.
forward kinematics means computing the end position based on all these individual transformations (rotating about different points and axes)
we consider this a rigid transformation, good for mechanical objects.

inverse kinematics means computing the necessary transformations at each level of a heirarchy in order for the end points to be placed at specific locations.

armatures are used to perform these animated transforms on organic meshes: rigid transforms are applied to the bones, and the bones then affect the vertices around them, according to their weights for that specific bone.
vertex skinning is another name for this. the skeleton is a heirarchical transform tree, each of which has an associated weight group representing how strongly it affects each vertex.
the bones just represent transforms (they have no geometry).
vertices are affected by 1-4 bones, and each of these has a weight (closer to 1 means strong effect). bone transforms are usually applied by the GPU, after the animation transforms have been computed on the CPU

characters are modelled in the bind pose (usually T pose) which represents the rest position.
animations are usually made from the reference pose (usually A pose)

we perform inverse bind transform (vertex in bone space) then bone transform (vertez in local space) then world view projection etc.
the inverse bind and bone transforms are combined on the CPU.

we can blend animations in 3D using transition points.
additive blending means we animate different parts of a mesh differently (legs independent of aiming in shooters).

forward kinematics have a problem, which is that they don't respect things around them. inverse kinematics can help solve this, by targeting particular bones to be in particular places (aligning feet to stairs, etc). this is key for procedural animation. however, this requires some serious maths. like, serious, numerical approximations (cyclic coordinate descent).

ragdoll physics is cool and funny. uses springs and constraints and then lets the physics engine take control.