# matrices
matrices can represent geometric transformation operations of points. the manual mathematics for e.g. performing a rotation on a point can be encoded into a matrix.
transformations can be applied to a vector by multiplying the vector and the matrix together. better still, you can multiply matrices together to get a compound matrix which represents those transformations applied one after another. a 2D rotation matrix looks like this:

$$
\begin{bmatrix} \cos(\theta) & -\sin(\theta) \\ \sin(\theta) & \cos(\theta)\end{bmatrix}
$$

the identity matrix looks like this:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 1
\end{bmatrix}
$$
because performing matrix-vector multiplication results in no change to the original vector.

see [[graphics programming in summary]] for a full summary of vector and matrix maths.

scale matrices look like this:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
x & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & y & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & z & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
\end{bmatrix}
$$
translation matrices look like this:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 0 & 0 & x \\
0 & 1 & 0 & y \\
0 & 0 & 1 & z \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
\end{bmatrix}
$$

this works because in 3D we're really working with **homogenous coordinates**, which look like this $\begin{bmatrix} x \\ y \\ z \\ 1\end{bmatrix}$. the $1$ at the end allows us to do translation by being a 'multiply by one' by which we can effectively add constants via matrix multiplication. the W component also allows us to do some other clever things like perspective transform and skewing. usually it is homogenised to always be $1$ (sometimes $0$).

elements are usually described as `matrix[row][column]`.

# normal vectors
not all vectors should translate. vectors which represent purely direction (i.e. not positional like points) should not be translated. these usually have their W coordinate set to zero, meaning translation matrices have no effect while rotation and scale are still applied (remember that normals should also still be length 1! so if you scale them you need to re-normalise).

# matrix operations
you can add and subtract (elementwise) matrices of the same dimension. you can also scale matrices. 

more importantly, you can find the inverse of a matrix (representing a transformation which does the reverse of the original matrix. e.g. a matrix which rotates something by 90 degrees around the Z axis would have an inverse which rotates it by 90 degrees counter-clockwise around the Z axis). multiplying a matrix by its inverse produces the identity matrix (i.e. applying a transform and then un-applying it produces no change).

matrix multiplication allows you to combine transformations into a single matrix. you do this by dot-producting a row from the first with a column from the second, and the result (multiply elements and sum) is the corresponding number in the row-column box in the resulting matrix. matrix multiplication is associative ($(A*B)*C = A*(B*C)$), but **NOT** commutative ($A*B \neq B*A$). this makes sense since transformations are not commutative (the order of application matters).

the associativity is what allows us to combine transformations into a single ultra-transformation which makes applying that transformation to many vectors fast (e.g. rotating a large mesh).

# matrices in rendering
an object should have its own world (or model-to-world) matrix which represents the transformation from model to world space. effectively we store the 'local up', 'local left', 'local forward' for the object.

in C++ with D3D we are dealing with column major matrices, while shaders (and GPUs) work on row major matrices due to how SIMD registers/instructions are organised. mathematics (including all of my maths) also usually is shown as **row** major.

for D3D we have two data types for matrices, `XMFLOAT4X4` for storage and `XMMATRIX` for calculations (`XMFLOAT4` for vector storage and `XMVECTOR` for vector calculations).