# terrain and procedural generation
terrain is often very large, impractical to create by hand. automated methods are common. although you'd expect it to be one mesh, its better to break it into chunks, to improve load times and enable lower LOD meshes to be used for faraway chunks.

algorithmic generation often operates on height maps: generate a big, subdivided plane, then offset the Z coordinate of the terrain based on a noise texture/algorithm. this can make storing terrain much simpler (the plane can be generated at runtime, with the heightmap being used to offset it vertically).

the height and steepness can be used to texture the terrain.

heightmaps often need to be scaled, especially if the texture is using uint byte data storage.

computing random numbers is hard. computers don't do random, they do what they're told to, so random numbers are pseudorandom (predictable, but de-correlated from the input seed in a way that it looks random).

actually, purely random generation isn't all that useful. *procedural* generation is usually more algorithmic, generating a world/dungeon/etc within a collection of set rules, but with some randomness introduced. designing around this is hard!

constraint based generation, for instance wave function collapse, are used to fill in between known constraints.

cellular automata (YEAAAAA) - grid of cells which are born or die based on a set of rules. for example, Conway's Game of Life:
a dead cell with exactly 3 live neighbours becomes alive
a live cell with one or zero neighbours dies of isolation
a live cell with four or more neighbours dies of overcrowding
a live cell with two or three neighbours remains alive

B678/S345678 - born if 6/7/8 neighbours, survive if 3/4/5/6/7/8 neighbours.
requires cleaning up usually, if used for procedural generation. can be performed using minimum spanning tree algorithm.

fault line algorithm, random walk, voronoi, perlin.
noise functions like voronoi, perlin are deterministic: the same input point in the noise function will produce the same output.
you can do this in 3D, 4D, however many dimensions you want.
spots and Worley are both Voronoi-powered.
we can sample the noise texture multiple times and layer the result with decreasing importance, often called fractal brownian motion.

image processing algorithms are useful for generation: erosion (elements get smaller) and dilation (elements get larger) can be used to do stuff. gaussian blur.
https://youtu.be/gsJHzBTPG0Y?si=_TKCvGWHiR9sP-yi