module texts:
- introduction to 3d game programming with directx 11 (Frank d luna)
- foundations of game engine development vol 2 (eric lengyel)

weeks:
intro + matrices
3d pipeline and HLSL
lighting + texturing
offline data + runtime systems
environmental effects and improved camera
post processing and transparency
procedural terrain + animation
efficient rendering + raytracing

the assignment:
- artefact: (70%)
	- showcase rendering techniques
	- proficiency in directx
	- sound object oriented principles
	- git commit history (it does matter, and you need to name commits correctly)
- technical documentation (30%)
	- operation instructions for your program
	- UML class diagram
	- reflective report (1800 words roughly, what have you done well and how do you know its done well, what didnt you do well)

look back at early CGI projects...

things i want to acheive:
- interesting post processing
- noise textures
- ...ray tracing..?
- space setup (see oolite)

## directx
collection of APIs for multimedia tasks. used by most commercial GEs. Direct3D is the specific part we care about, providing tools to talk to rendering hardware. D3D makes our code hardware independent.

when targeting microsoft, directx probably ties in better and is easier to use than vulkan.

D3D11 is a forward rendering pipeline, doesn't care about command buffers (mostly), D3D12 and Vulkan are much more responsible over what you have control over.

## vector maths recap
a point is a location in 3D space. it can be thought of as a vector from the origin (aka 'standard position') to the point. the magnitude of a vector is its length. all points are vectors, but not all vectors are points.

you can add, subtract, multiply, divide, scale, magnitude, dot product, and cross product vectors. see the big graphics programming document.
_* vector maths *_

`XMVECTOR` and `XMFLOAT` are D3D's data types.

these are related to SIMD instructions (Single Instruction Multiple Data), which are used for accelerating stuff.

`XMVECTOR`s are not long-term storage. they represent **registers** and can be corrupted if overused. `XMFLOAT` is the storage version. used like so:
```c++
XMFLOAT3 storage = XMFLOAT3(1,1,1);
XMVECTOR3 reg = XMLoadFLoat3(&storage);
reg *= 10;
XMStoreFloat3(&storage, reg);
```

## geometry out of triangles
you can construct geometry from a collection of triangles (they're easy to render). you need to list the vertices of the triangle in a certain order, so that we know which side of them is supposed to be the front. in D3D11 this is **clockwise**.

```
0 --- 1
|     |
|     |
2 --- 3
```
unwind this into triangles: 012, 132 (one way to do it).

there's no point storing the position of every face corner, since most of them will be shared with at least two triangles. instead we store a list of all the vertex positions, and then store indices into that list to define our triangles.

**D3D uses left-hand coordinates**. -Z comes out of the screen (X right and Y up). so an un-transformed camera is at the origin looking down. the correct way in other words.