its christmas apparently
and also my birthday
# raytracing intro - the last lecture

standard way to do global illumination. finally possible in realtime.

global illumination allows geometry elements to affect each other.

raytracing specifically allows physically accurate rendering very easily, since you're basically simulating light. gives you effects like refraction, reflection, diffuseness, shadows, colour bleeding, ambient occlusion, etc. horrifically computationally expensive, but modern hardware has dedicated hardware raytracing functionality.

cast a ray out of each pixel, test it against all the geometry in the scene to see what intersection is closest to the camera. then, bounce that ray randomly into the scene from the hit point, taking into account the surface properties (colour, normal, reflectivity, roughness) repeatedly.

we trace rays backwards like this because if we trace rays from light sources, 99.999% of the time they miss the camera and the computation is wasted.

reflected ray direction: $R = D - 2(D\cdot N)N$

no real world surface is a perfect mirror, even the lightest surfaces reflect only 95-98%, while even near perfectly black surfaces reflect some light.

different materials interact with light differently, for instance metallic surfaces absorb and re-emit light instead of simply reflecting it.

refraction can be done with raytracing, by casting rays through a transparent object and changing their direction according to snell's law. 'transmission' includes both refraction and translucency.

in DX12, you do raytracing with a few different shaders:
- ray generation shaders - the starting point, define how rays interact, and intersect with geometry
- hit shaders - executed when a ray hits geometry (closest-hit, any-hit, intersection), handles shading and material effects
- miss shaders - executed for rays that don't intersect any geometry

there is an acceleration structure which is crtical for ray tracing, hierarchically
- BLAS - individual geometry pieces and which triangles to test
- TLAS - broader test for which objects might have been hit

these can be nested to eliminate as many objects/geometry as possible to minimise the number of actual triangle tests requied.

