# transparency and alpha blending
this is hard with depth-buffering based rendering. in order to do transparency properly, you need to order things so that transparents draw on top of opaques.

to avoid that, you can do 'screen-door transparency', which works by using dithering to choose whether to draw the transparent object. not super realistic, but doesn't require proper alpha blending.

blending just means mixing two colours together. we can use the alpha channel to tell DX how to blend a fragment over the existing value in the buffer. this is performed during the output merger stage.

blending happens between a source (the new colour) and a destination (the existing colour) colour according to some operation (configurable). by default, the source will just overwrite the destination. simple non-alpha modes are additive/subtractive.

alpha may be used to represent coverage as well as opacity, e.g. for anti-aliasing (how much of a pixel is covered by a fragment).

in order to fix the transparency order issue, just draw transparents back-to-front! lots of overdraw though...

alpha-over blending is a common method, where the resulting colour is equal to: $C_o = a_s c_s + (1-a_s)c_d$

alpha-under blending involves reverse sorting and rendering front to back, disabling back buffering, and then composite fragments under one another.

transmittance threshold - culling pixels which have an alpha near zero.

pre-multiplied alpha - the colour channels of a texture have already been multiplied by the alpha, meaning that they shouldn't be multiplied by it again later (as this would artificially darken the colour around the border).

order independent transparency - doesnt care about the order of objects. good topic for FYP. exact OIT accurately computes final colour, all fragments must be sorted. approximate OIT is imperfect but faster.

read 3D Game Programming with DX11!! and also IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications by James Blinn
