'runtime systems' - tidying your code up.

graphics APIs talk to drivers so that the next layer can be cross-hardware (OpenGL, GNM(X), DirectX, Vulkan). Xbox uses DX, playstation uses GNM, Switch uses GL or VK.

a graphics engine provides abstraction on top of the graphics API. e.g. rendering to texture, scene graphs, motion blur, etc. e.g. Godot, CryEngine, Cocos2dx, Armory, id Tech, RE Engine.

we're building a graphics engine effectively. we should aim to separate tasks: resource managements, shadows, post processing, sprites, texturing/materialing, lighting.

game engines build on graphics engines to add other functionality, like audio, scripting, a GUI editor, exports, etc.

game/graphics engines both need to manage the loading and unloading of assets. assets might need to be unloaded when not save memory. we may want to load things synchronously (in time), or asynchronously (on a background thread).

we also don't want to load duplicates of things. we only need one copy of each unique resource. (**flyweight pattern**)

scene graphs are very very useful for building 3D environments. it's like a list, but better! make it easy to handle how objects are transformed, or how they are organised, or how they show/hide, etc.

decouple elements as much as possible. do lights need to know about textures? probably not.

encapsulation means enclosing information into an object and only exposing as much of it as other/outside code needs to access.

hardware actually supports 'instanced rendering', which allows you to reuse the same block of data (verts, indices, uniforms) and draw lots of things very fast (GPUs hate state switching), with some unique data between instances (such as ID).

TODO: separate Application code slightly more

reference counting is a great way to track when a resource should be loaded. when it becomes referenced, the counter gets incremented, when that reference is destroyed (e.g. the thing using the resource got unloaded), the counter is decremented.

we need to be careful with loading and unloading stuff. we can easily end up with fragmentation. we can use custom allocators, memory pools. memory allocation is slow as fuck!