camera in Journey

start watching GDC talks probably.

## camera principles
- dont be too fancy - free cam introduces a lot of variance that often isn't needed. 'perfection is not when there is nothing left to add, but when there is nothing left to be taken away'
- obey player intent - if the player has control of the camera, the camera should be responding to their input. adjust input so they can't force the camera into bad places, but always respond to input somehow. camera should maintain some sort of momentum which the player can control. moving the camera too quickly randomly causes motion sickness
- don't change controls spontaneously - randomly switching movement direction as the player moves e.g. into a new area sucks and might even get the player stuck
- never block the camera - use a sphere trace to push the camera closer to the player, or out away from the obstacle, maybe make objects translucent when they're in front of the player, or make an effort to avoid such situations through level design. use cuts whenever the player goes through a small opening like a door instead of trying to squeeze it through, potentially black out the camera for a few frames
- track the camera offset relative to it's focal point - the focal point isn't necessarily the player. if the camera is offset from the focal point, you can move and rotate around the focal point without too much manual transformation
- rule of thirds - keeping elements on the intersections of the lines of thirds is visually pleasing. allow objects of interests to share the screen with the player using this (relevant objects should be tagged or marked in some way). you can do this both by panning/zooming the camera but also by moving the focal point

## virtual cameras
a frustrum is a 3D trapezoid which defines the space the camera can see, bounded between the near and far planes. if things are inside the view frustrum, they are being rendered, and will be flattened onto the near plane.

LODs are levels of detail, if objects are far away then they can be rendered at a low level of detail for performance, meaning reducing texture and geometry resolution. this goes as far as replacing things like trees with static pngs. this saves a ton of resources on big worlds, but can look very silly if done incorrectly. often going out of bounds or unlocking the camera can completely break systems like this.

FOV is field of view, the angle (usually measured horizontally on the outside, but vertically on the inside) of the camera view. greater field of view makes more stuff visible (by stretching the far clip plane of the frustrum) but increases perspective distortion. dynamically adjusting this gives a 'tunnel vision' effect which can be great to affect the illusion of speed. you can do a clever thing called a dolly zoom, which involves changing the FOV and the distance to the subject at the same time, creating the appearance of space stretching.
