The art gallery problem is a geometric problem in which an uneven, concave polygon (i.e. 2D shape, though the problem also exists for 3D polyhedra but is much harder to solve) must have the minimum possible number of 'guards' posted at discrete points on or within the polygon such that the entire polygon is 'visible' to the guards (i.e. there is an unbroken ray that leads from any point on any edge to at least one guard). The problem specifically is finding the minimum number of guards.

The analogy is referential to an art gallery of course, with various rooms of different shapes, which is likely to be concave and possible have disconnected obstacles within the gallery. In this scenario, we need to be able to see the whole gallery at once to keep the artworks safe from theft or vandalism, while hopefully minimising the number of guards required to guard it at once. We assume that each guard has 360 degree vision.

Václav Chvátal showed that the maximum possible number of guards required was equal to $\frac{n}{3}$ , where $n$ is the number of vertices in the polygon. It can be seen that a single guard must be able to observe the whole of a convex shape (of which a triangle is the simplest and always convex), since no matter where within or on a triangle we place our observation point, we can draw direct lines to all the corners of the triangle. We can see therefore that Chvátal's theorem is true, because if we triangulate the polygon (i.e. we ensure the entire shape is made up of shapes of only 3 vertices) the maximum possible number of triangles we could end up with is $\frac{n}{3}$ , for the case where the gallery is made up of a number of disconnected triangles which share no vertices with one another, and since we need exactly one guard per triangle, we can then see that the maximum possible number of guards needed would be also $\frac{n}{3}$ .

However, our number of guards is reduced when we consider that many triangles will share at least one vertex with a neighbour, usually sharing two with any particular neighbour, which could reduce the number of guards required if the maxiumum angle between two adjacent triangles is less than 180 degrees (i.e., the two triangles together form single convex quadrilateral) saving one guard each time this happens. The difficulty of the art gallery problem lies in decomposing a complex shape with many 'ins and outs' and placing guards optimally.

