scalars = one value
vectors = multiple values (components) oooo

Unity has types for Vector2, Vector3, Vector4, which use floats, plus Vector2Int etc for ints

vectors have magnitude, i.e. length, which you can change (without changing direction) by multiplying the vector by a scalar

Unity has vector defaults for `Vector3.zero`, `.right`, `.up`, `.forward`, `.one`, etc.

vectors can be added/subtracted, scaled by scalars (multiplication/division), multiplied together (multiplying individual elements together), dot-producted (multiplying corresponding elements together and adding them up) which can be used to find the angle between two vectors, cross producted (multiplying different elements together fancily) which gives a perpendicular vector and the angle between the vectors, and normalised (scaled so that the length is 1).

woo position vectors aren't real

`Vector3.Angle()` - angle between vectors
`Vector3.Distance()` - distance between two points
`Vector3.Normalize()` - normalise vector
`Vector3.Dot()` - dot product of vectors
`Vector3.Cross()` - cross product
`Vector3.x, .y, .z` - components
`Vector3.magnitude` - magnitude of the vector


you can change the gravity vector in Project Settings, or adjust it for individual physics bodies. Unity, sensibly, uses SI units (metres, kilograms).

for objects to collide, they need to both have colliders and at least one needs to have a rigidbody.
objects can alternatively have softbodies, which are much more computationally expensive and not necessary most of the time.

rigidbodies can be set as kinematic, which means they're controlled by the animation system (or other) and so don't respond to forces/collisions (still receive collision events).

instead of using a complex mesh collider, you can break it down and replace it with multiple simpler colliders (box, sphere, capsule, etc) which is much less computationally expensive.

**only convex colliders can have rigidbodies and collide with other colliders**

you can mark objects as static in the inspector, and static objects can use complex mesh colliders without huge expense.

Unity supports different collision methods:
- Discrete - basic and per-frame, cheap
- Continuous - good for fast-moving objects that may pass through non-rigidbody colliders
- Continuous dynamic - stops two fast-moving rigidbodies from passing through one another
- Continuous speculative - check for collisions with any colliders regardless of their collider type, cheap but less accurate

