# steering behaviours
bebab

a single behaviour should only attempt to do one thing. we can combine simple behaviours to produce complex movement. agents have a velocity, and forces (not necessarily physics forces) which dictate where they go (for instance a seek force, a flee force, etc). **'forces' as an analogy for combining the intentions of different behaviours.**

**seek** - force that directs agent toward a target. calculate vector to target, normalise, scale to equal speed of agent. then subtract current velocity in order to provide a force that represents moving from the current target toward the target location instead.

**flee** - same as seek, but the agent-to-target vector is negated so the agent is trying to move away from the target. might use a flee radius, where the flee behaviour is weighted down when the agent gets far enough away.

**arrive** - similar to seek but decelerates as it approaches the target. vector to target, apply deceleration force to oppose velocity toward target.

**evade** - predict opponent's next position, move accordingly. time to predict to is equal to distance to opponent divided by the sum of the opponent velocity and the current velocity. then flee from opponent position + (opponent velocity * prediction time).

**pursue** - apply the same advancement from evade to the original seek.

**wander** - project a circle in front of the agent, then pick a random point on the unit circle and steer toward that.

**obstacle avoidance** - whisker positions projected around the agent (mostly in direction of motion) taking velocity into account. if these whisker positions collide with obstacles. calculate penetration vector, use magnitude and normal vector to turn away from object. only apply one force at a time (dont do every colliding whisker)

wall avoid
hide
interpose