classical mechanics

$s=ut + \frac{1}{2} at^2$ 
$v^2 = u^2 + 2as$

time step should never be zero (divide by zero), weird behaviour, floating point error.

we use SI units. length in metres, time in seconds, mass in kg, force in newtons.

newtons laws:

1. body at rest remains at rest unless acted on by a force (velocity does not change without an external force)
    
2. acceleration is proportional to the resultsnt force on an object, and in the same direction
    
3. for every action force, there is an equal and opposite reaction force which acts in the opposite direction and on the opposing object
    

f=ma

greater force is required to accelerate a larger mass by the same amount.

mass resists acceleration. weight is a force which is exerted as a result of gravity acting on mass.

momentum is conserved! since momentum is a form of stored energy.

acceleration, velocity, and displacement are all vectors (direction and magnitude).

va0 * ma + vb0 * mb = va1 * ma + vb1 * ma

forces lead to acceleration, acceleration leads to change in velocity, velocity leads to change in position.

v = ds / dt (differentiate displacement with respect to time)  
a = dv / dt (differentiate velocity with respect to time)

integrate with respect to time to go back.

center of mass is the mean point around which an object’s mass is distributed. forces effectively act through here. forces applied to here do not cause rotation, elsewhere they do. moment of inertia is a bodys resistance to rotation.