impulse - force that acts over a very short/instantaneous timeframe
impulse equals change in momentum. objects apply an impulse to one another when they collide.

$J$ signifies impulse: $J = F \Delta t$
$\Delta v = J / m$ since momentum is relative to mass.
$p$ signifies momentum: $p=mv$

momentum is always conserved. during a collision, momentum may be redistributed between objects, but the sum of momentum in all axes always remains the same.

collisions require calculating collision normal (center to center in the case of spheres).

calculate total resultant velocity: $e$ is coeff of restitution, $v_r$ is relative velocity, $\hat n$ is collision normal.
$v_j = -(1+e)v_r \cdot \hat n$ 

conserve momentum:
$J = \frac{v_j}{\frac{1}{m_a}+\frac{1}{m_b}}$
then this impulse magnitude is applied to each object with respect to the collision normal (and the mass of the relevant object)

however most of the time objects to not collide perfectly, so engine needs to handle penetration.

find penetration depth using methods the slides dont explain. 'closest point' 'separating axis' 'expanding polytope algorithm'

find minimum traversal distance (minimum motion required to separate objects).
separation methods:
- linear projection: move objects by minimum traversal distance, split according to inverse mass of objects. can be jittery
- velocity based: reverse objects motion according to velocity until first contact point. algebraic solution
- nonlinear projections: modification of LP, also applies rotation taking moment of inertia into account. must calculate rotational response

useful to accelerate collision detection since every object has to tested against every other ($n^2$). use broadphase collision tests to quickly eliminate objects which can't be colliding. BPC must identify ALL possible collisions, false positives allowed, false negatives not allowed (no collisions missed).

one solution is Bounding Volume Hierarchies. recursively split space into a tree structure until each leaf contains only one object. may be built bottom up or top down. simple collision tests with branches (sphere collision eg) can then quickly build a list of leaf nodes (objects) which need to be properly tested for collision.

alternatively spatial data structures, world is divided into a grid of discrete areas. often hierarchical: quad-trees or octrees recursively subdivide individual areas. can easily check if two objects are in adjacent/the same grid block before checking more complex collision.