basic process of physics engine:
1. calculate forces
2. calculate acceleration
3. calculate velocity
4. calculate new position

key forces:
- gravity
- friction if colliding with a surface
- drag if not in a vacuum

usually either field forces (at a distance) or contact (friction, restitution, thrust)

newton's gravitation - every mass in the universe is attracted by every other mass, according to this equation:
$$|F_AB|=|F_BA|=G \frac{m_A\times m_B}{d^2}$$
at Earth's surface, this equation comes out to be $\approx 9.81 \times m_B$, since the distance above the surface is trivial compared to the radius of the planet.

the Earth does not accelerate as much as the second mass does, because the equal reaction force exerted is applied across a vastly greater mass (and $F=ma$, so when $m$ is greater and $F$ is the same, $a$ is lesser).

friction opposes relative motion when surfaces are in contact. friction force is parallel to the surface, in the opposite direction of motion. perpendicular to surface normal force (force which resists the force holding the object to the surface, e.g. gravity). $\mu$ is the coefficient of friction, determined by the combination of surfaces.
$$F_f = \mu|N| \times -\hat{F}$$
two cases for friction: static and kinetic. usually have different $\mu$s. static keeps an object at rest, and its $\mu$ is usually higher.

$F_f$ represents the maximal friction force, meaning that it cannot exceed $|F|$ (as that would cause an object to move backwards?).

you can calculate inclined plane stuff by simply calculating the normal force component-wise from gravity (or whatever is holding the object down) (or using vector projection maybe??)

drag resists motion through a fluid: may be laminar (layers do not interact, used for slower object motion) or turbulent (layers interacting chaotically, used for faster motion).
$$F_d=s|V|^k\times -\hat{V}$$
for laminar flow, $k=1$, for turbulent flow, $k=2$
$s$ is a coefficient that is set, however it can be calculated more precisely:
$$s=0.5 p C_d A$$
$p$ is density of fluid (actually lowercase phi but i cba)
$C_d$ is drag coefficient, usually from a table
$A$ is reference area, i.e. cross sectional area perpendicular to motion

**D'Alembert's principle** just means adding up forces using vector addition to calculate a single resultant force vector. this can then be divided by mass to give acceleration, which can then be multiplied by time to update velocity, which can then be multiplied by time to update position.