each model/element in a scene has its own coordinate space. the scene has 'world coordinates'.

coordinates within **model space** are transformed using the **model transformation** into **world space coordinates**. those **world coordinates** are then transformed into **view space** using the **viewing transformation**, which takes into account the position and orientation of the camera. these points are then transformed again using the **projection transformation** which flattens points onto a virtual screen, accounting for field of view, near and far clips, and aspect ratio, to produce 2D **projection coordinates** as **Normalised Device Coordinates** (NDCs). these are finally transformed via the **viewport** transformation to convert those points to be relative to the viewport (i.e. from the top left, etc), leaving **2D device coordinates**

model space -> world space -> view space -> NDC -> device space/screen space

## object definition
- mesh (geometry, vertices, triangles, etc)
- modelling coordinates (transform, rotation, position, scale)
- materials (colours, textures, lighting behaviour)

## camera definition
- view specification (position, rotation, field of view, clips)

camera can be specified with the look-at vector, the up vector (and these two together can be used to construct a right vector).

GLUT can do `gluLookAt` to construct a view specification from an origin, target, and up vector.

OpenGL can do projection for you, including clipping and culling. the view window is then mapped into the output device (i.e. the window, etc).

the viewing transform involves moving and rotating the scene such that the camera is at the origin and unrotated, (keeping the objects in the same relative position).

orthographic projection projects things directly onto the image plane (aka view window) without correcting for perspective. objects are just flattened.

perspective projections instead projects things toward a point (the origin of the camera), and transforms things to where those transformations intersect with the view plane. further away objects appear smaller as a result..

## further reading
see powerpoint. also scratchapixel.