vector is a mathematical concept which represents a displacement from one point to another in a straight line. motion can be represented with various vectors for position, velocity, acceleration.

a vector has direction and magnitude. it can be used to represent a position, when treated as a vector from the origin to the point.

a unit vector has length 1, normals are an example of this (or at least, they should be length 1), and this is what it means to normalise a vector.

friction is a force which acts against motion.

all motion is tied to time and so should be appropriately maths-ed with delta-time to correctly calculate how much an object should move between frames.

collisions can be processed with numerous methods, but two common methods are bounding spheres and axis aligned bounding boxes (AABBs). collisions between bounding spheres can be tested very quickly by just checking if the distance between their centers is less than the two radii added together. AABBs can be tested by checking the X and Y mins and maxs of the two bounding boxes against one another.

GLUT supports menus using `initMenu()`, `glutCreateMenu(callbackFunction)`, `glutAddMenuEntry("text", /*integer value to be passed to callback*/)`, `glutAttachMenu(GLUT_LEFT_BUTTON)`.

you can do selection by raycasting from the mouse. this requires sending the mouse screen position backwards through the transformation pipeline to get the world space coordinates.

`glPushMatrix()` and `glPopMatrix()` are used to maintain separate transformation matrices. the top of the matrix stack is used for transformations. pushmatrix will create copy of the top matrix and push it on top, then when you modify it you'll keep the backup copy below it, which can be restored with popmatrix.