materials specify the fractions of red, green, and blue light that they reflect, for each of the ambient, diffuse, and specular light components.

in opengl:

Ambient light is calculated like this ($a$ is the overall ambient colour, $a_L$ is the light's ambient component, $a_M$ is the material's ambient component)
$a = a_L \times a_M$ 
Diffuse light is calculated like this ($L$ is the vector from the light to the surface, $N$ is the surface normal), this formula does not take distance into account (i.e. this is for a directional light)
$d = d_L \times d_M \times (\hat L \cdot \hat N)$ 

directional lights exist infinitely far away from objects, and do not have a fall-off, they project directional light rays everywhere, in a particular direction. set light position $w$ component to $0$ to do this. otherwise light will be treated as a point/spot light.

the three types of shading models are:
- flat shading (per-vertex shading)
- smooth shading (per-vertex shading, interpolating between vertices, aka Gouraud shading)
- phong shading (per-pixel, combines the Diffuse-Ambient-Specular model)

normal mapping is a technique for providing custom surface normals which are combined with existing face normals and are sampled like a texture (i.e. you can simulate bumpy surfaces without thousands of vertices). existing normals are perturbed based on a texture. OpenGL 1.x does not support normal maps.

scaling models causes normals to be scaled! use `glEnable(GL_NORMALIZE)` if models are being scaled.