a thread represents the execution point of a particular program. encapsulates information about the memory access etc. however, a single program can host multiple threads, i.e. which are executing at different points in the code simultaneously. the scheduler is part of the kernel and handles swapping different threads (including from different programs) in and out of the limited set of logical processors to spread execution time between them and give the illusion of thousands of threads executing concurrently.

within any given thread, code executes in a linear fashion.

one way to do concurrency in C# is with `Parallel`:
```Csharp
Parallel.For(0, 100,
	index ->
	{
		Console.WriteLine(index);
	});
```

these secondary threads are spun off from the main thread.

another way to do concurrency is with `Thread`
```Csharp
Thread t = new Thread(new ParameterizedThreadStart(function)); // function becomes a delegate

t.Start(1); // start the thread, with a parameter being passed to the function
// ...
t.Join(); // wait for thread to finish executing

void function(object thread_num);
```

a major problem encountered with threads is called a **race condition**. this happens when they share data. for instance, two threads might simultaneously retrieve, increment, then store the same variable. potentially only one incrementation would go through.

another issue is **deadlock**, where one thread 'locks' a resource, but cannot operate on it (and release it) until it gains access to another block of data, which is locked by a different thread; and that different thread also cannot release it until it gains access to the first block of data. this results in both threads just waiting against one another forever.

another issue is **starvation**, where the threads also stall while endlessly testing a flag for whether or not to do something.

these three problems together are called the **Three Main Control Problems**; due to the need for access control and mutual exclusion to solve race conditions, we introduce the potential for deadlock and starvation.

parts of code which might cause these issues are called **critical sections**. mutual exclusion is used to cover these sections in order to prevent threads from fighting over resources. however, you need to minimise the size of mutual exclusions sessions, otherwise other threads may waste time waiting for critical sections to become free.

the **Producer-Consumer** problem is a problem of ensuring that only one consumer and one producer of data can access a buffer at once (there are many producers and one consumer). requires preventing things from entering a full buffer. buffer needs to be locked while it is being accessed AND while it's size is being updated. otherwise we might end up pulling from a blank buffer or overwriting data in a full one.

the dining philosophers problem is an example of **deadlock**. 5 philosophers sit around a table eating spaghetti, each needs two forks, but there are only 5 available and they alternate between eating and not eating. it's possible to get into a deadlock where every philosopher has one fork and is waiting on the other forever. this can be solved usually by adding a **timeout**. if you can't find a second fork, put down the first fork.

this might also introduce a problem called **livelock**, where everyone is deadlocked, but they're also performing the anti-deadlock timeout actions, but simultaneously (or correlated somehow) meaning that we never actually make any progress.

another way to solve the dining philosophers problem is to use **arbitration**. a single waiter serves forks to the philosophers one at a time and waits for the philosopher to have both forks and then put them down again. alternatively, have a doorman who only allows four philosophers at the table at once, meaning there is always a spare fork.

another solution is the **Chandy-Misra** solution. for this, the philosopher's can communicate: all forks begin dirty. when a philosopher wants a fork, he asks a neighbour for it. if the neighbour's fork is dirty, he cleans it and hands it over. if it is clean, he keeps it. when a philosopher finishes eating, both his forks become dirty. forks are never put down. very clever. also initially number them 1-5 and between each pair, allocate the fork to the philosopher with the lower ID.

another thing that can be useful is **randomisation**. can help prevent livelock if threads are delaying themselves for different amounts of time, but can introduce other problems and makes the program less predictable.

