NAT (network address translation) - your router has a public IP on the global internet, and when connecting to a faraway system, your router will wrap your local packet info in information about the host's public IP (e.g. router), which will be stripped down and sent on to the correct private IP within the target network.

the router has a public (facing the internet) and a private (facing into your network) IP. devices outside your network only talk to the router which passes packets along to the relevant device inside your network (plus firewall stuff).

192.168.x.x are all reserved for inside local networks. 127.0.0.1 is the loopback address, reserved for 'myself'.

ports allow multiple connections on the same IP address and allow us to route packets to specific applications. numbered 1 to 65535, zero being reserved. most applications use ports in the 1-1024 range.

NAT punch through - keeping a shared server which is used to establish connections between other machines which would otherwise drop one another's packets.

a socket is a structure which represents the end of the pipe between your system (IP and port) and the endpoint. usually includes a buffer for data which hasn't actually been sent over the network yet. can be read from and written to.

useful to use two threads per client, one for reading and one for writing.

you should put the game logic on the server.

server pool - multiple servers share game information but process their clients individually (i.e. to balance load).