## time management
i'm not generally a very well time-managed person. in most of my past projects (particularly personal ones) i find myself working whenever is convenient or in disproportionate blocks. i'm very much guilty of last-second-crunching. having small, concrete tasks helped me focus much more effectively, and while working more consistently reduced my productivity (i've found i work best late at night or in intense stretches), knowing exactly what i need to get done and not feeling overwhelmed massively boosted my productivity.
## estimation and planning
my previous experience with Unity, C#, and data structures gave me insights into how productive i can be, and how long different tasks might take. most of my time estimates during this project were fairly accurate (at least in the right ballpark). however, i had some estimates which were wildly inaccurate; these tended to be tasks related to areas of the engine i haven't used extensively, or haven't used in this way before.

many of the techniques i used in this project were techniques i've used before, such as singletons and the Input System. a lot of my estimates were minimally abve (5-15 minutes) the real time, which is down to two factors: improving slightly at implementing gameplay systems, through greater experience; and deliberately over-estimating in order to allow enough time for overruns.

the latter of these was particularly true, and i think it's better to slightly overestimate and have time to polish than to be running late.
## features i completed
i'm actually quite impressed with how much i managed to get done with this project. based on the way the course made it sound (the focus being on time management and not the game itself), i did not expect to have a fleshed out prototype to this extent. i ended up putting way more features and polish into the project than i anticipated, as evidenced by my adding tasks along the way. admittedly i did prune some, particularly the 'switching link types (A/B)' mechanic, but this was ultimately a good decision i think, since it did allow me to focus on creating robust fundamental systems and designing the structure of the turn controllers and game controller in a way that used Unity-best-practices (e.g. avoiding finding gameobjects every frame), leaves them open for extension and (hopefully) is easily understandable from the code.

## improvements
the main thing i think i could have done better is planning my sprint durations. this would have been easier if i had known how many sprints were expected from the start, and would have allowed me to do more even length sprints; i found 1-day sprints particularly unhelpful.
i also found that non-stop pressure sprints made me quite stressed about this project, as it was kind of always on my mind, particularly due to trying to squeeze in multiple sprints per week, but it seems that pushing to be more productive is kind of the point of agile methodology. i understand that industry sprints tend to be more like 2 weeks in length.