# ICO
big man Fumito Ueda turned up at Sony with no game dev experience and was like 'i have a dream' and they hired him.

ICO (2001) was a game about helping someone escape a castle, where holding hands is the core mechanic, she cannot find her own way. early example of main-interaction ability not being murder-related.

# Shadow of the Colossus

Shadow of the Colossus is about how love is foolish and makes you do foolish/wrong things: you try to resurrect your girlfriend, and a god barters with you to kill the Colossi of this world and pay an additional price in order to do so.

as you kill colossi, their statues in the resurrection temple are destroyed.

## key mechanics
- sword to reflecting sunlight (does not work in the shade), introduced as a way to lead you to the first colossus
- some mystery mechanics which are revealed via an optional place on the way to the first colossus
- parkour, movement, stamina, introduced via making you climb up a cliff
- sword sunlight can be used to discover weak spots on bosses, introduced by the colossus at the end of the tutorial
- the climbing mechanic is usable to climb colossi, charge attacks, etc, the first colossus is styled after the cliff you just climbed to highlight this
- the bow gives you a ranged attack, which the second colossus forces you to learn to use (you can shoot its feet and then climb it to attack, linking together these two mechanics)

> introducing the player to mechanics and game elements optionally rewards them for actually going out of your way to explore is a great way to add depth (and easter eggs)

## fights
one fight involves baiting the AI into hitting a hard patch of ground so that you can climb it. it starts using the environment more. it also has multiple stages! by breaking a wrist mantle, then next time he slams his arm down, you can climb him. ooo scawwy puzzle boss.

another fight involves aggroing the colossus to chase you to a bunker, then run through a tunnel network to get behind it. this one doesn't want to kill you automatically (you're the aggressor)

different colossi each involve learning to play by the terms of the environment and the particular boss behaviour and force you to use abilities and mechanics in different combinations

there's a callback fight to the first colossus to reduce over-saturation for the player

another fight forces you to move continuously on your horse, while using your bow, teaching you you can use the bow while riding, and making you learn to ride without looking where you're going

one fight uses the same shoot-then-climb mechanic but raises the stakes by taking you much higher (i.e. you die if you fall)

SotC builds to a climax but turns away at the last moment, but it has to sow the seeds of that beforehand (otherwise it looks like you just ran out of dev time)

## applying ideas
the map is vast and mostly empty. when not fighting, there's no music. no fast travel, no living things beside geckos and some plants. just you and the world
> it forces you to reflect, immerse yourself, and take the time to travel the game world

distilling mechanics: more doesn't mean better. building mechanics as tools can lead to emergent synthesis that allow you to build new combined mechanics and techniques ('multiplicative design')

incrementally introduce mechanics by combining them with novel challenges that force the player to learn for themselves. avoid overusing single mechanics

pacing is key. story needs space to have meaning, contrast is important (the Kuleshov effect?)

keep extra things hidden. let players find things for themselves, let them exercise their own agency (collectibles for instance)

fewer, more focused and distinct challenges make a better experience than many varied/similar ones

## hidden mechanics
there are save shrines and trees, shrines have geckos and trees have fruit. gecko tails give you more stamina (you can even do it without killing the gecko). fruit shot off trees increase your maximum health. the game is balanced for things found directly in your path, but there are enough other shrines and trees hidden around the world to change your difficulty by going looking for things

# The Last Guardian
The Last Guardian tries to get the player to bond with their AI partner. this often falls down because the AI often makes poor decisions and the klunky main mechanic breaks immersion. TLG ended up being overscoped.

