MINECRAFT - 3D sandbox open world game by Mojang Studios. Bestselling game in history, written in Java originally.

## procedural generation
proc gen - computer makes stuff for you with random numbers.

to generate continuous stuff, you often want noise textures, rather than pure random numbers. noise textures give you a continuous field of randomness, rather than completely random values for every point in the field.

random number generation can be seeded, a seed is the starting state of the random generator. by seeding an RNG, you will always get the same sequence of outputs for that seed.

seeds cycle around an extremely long cycle (using for example, the Mersenne Twister), and the state can be advanced to generate a new number, while the current state can be converted to a meaningful number (float, bool, integer, integer in range, etc).

there's no such thing as random, only pseudorandom. good RNGs, like the mersenne twister, obfuscate the pattern that they form sufficiently to appear random.

noise consists of creating continuous random values and interpolating them across a texture. to generate 1D, 2D, 3D, even 4D smooth noise with various characteristics
- white noise: random value per pixel
- perlin noise: random values at grid points, interpolation
- cellular/voronoi noise: distance to closest random point
- fractal brownian motion

there are lots of types of noise with different characteristics, and appearances. you can modify, reuse, combine, stack, do whatever you want to noise textures to create a unique and particular type of final procedural noise.

minecraft does it something like this:
1. map out biomes
2. generate terrain: top, caves, water
3. populate: structures, villages, strongholds, trees grass, ore-veins, etc

## the farlands
the farlands was a bug which appeared in early versions of the game, producing odd, spongey, vertical walls of terrain. this is due to reaching the limit of different integers, resulting in garbled generation. appears around 12,550,821 blocks out from the origin.

## performance
generation often uses spatial partitioning: in minecraft, called chunks. chunks are 16x16x384 (now). this allows the world to be generated in manageable bits. you no longer have to generate an entire world at once, you can generate it in chunks, as long as you ensure that the properties of the edges of chunks match with their neighbours, and the noise used to generate them is continuous across chunk boundaries. by seeding each chunk based on its position (and the world seed), that chunk will always be the same, no matter what order chunks are generated in.
chunking also allows you to unload portions of the world.

## remeshing
in a voxel game, you want to save some performance. rather than rendering millions of cubes (a single minecraft chunk is 1.2 million tris!), you can remesh your terrain data to remove the majority of triangles. assuming you have no caves, probably only the top surface is being rendered. this saves both memory and computation. cube faces which are facing one another don't need to be rendered, only the out-facing faces need to be rendered.

greedy meshing is also important: rather than rendering a 5x5 wall as being 5x5 squares split into triangles, you can combine all of those faces into one big, 5x5 face split into two triangles. 50 triangles -> 2 triangles.

normally, a single vertex might be 32 bytes long (position, normal, texture ID, texture coordinate). this would put a chunk at 94.5MiB! however, we can be more efficient than this. we don't need floats for positions, since we know minecraft is locked to a grid. in a chunk, we only need 9 bits per coordinate (much less in fact) to store position (0-511 in each axis). you then store the normal as a 3-bit vector 3. we probably need 11 bits to store which texture to use. the texture coordinates can be worked out from the world position. and so we can pack all the information for a vertex comfortably into a 64-bit int. you can do even more, for instance individual verts don't need normals, and textures are per-triangle rather than per-vertex. you can separate chunks into individual meshes facing in each cardinal direction (half of which you don't need to send since they'll be backfaces!).

## redstone
redstone is electronics but in minecraft. redstone functions as wires, powered by buttons, levers, redstone torches. their signal strength decreases with distance. you can use behaviour of redstone torches which turn off when powered to build logic gates. repeaters refresh the signal strength and delay the propagation of the signal. you can use them to control doors, pistons, lights, etc. redstone is indeed turing-complete, so you can build a computer.
redstone is stateless, every frame each cell is evaluated every frame, propagating power to adjacent cells.

## modding
mods add variety, allow players to tweak things, fix bugs or QoL issues. all sorts of mods exist to add content like nuclear reactors, new dimensions, enemies, abilities, etc. making games moddable is generally a good idea, since even with live-service games, if people can't mod your game, they'll just break it instead.

texture and sound packs are easier to add, by simply replacing the texture for say, grass, with a different texture (e.g. jerma's face).

the bytecode pattern is useful here. players can write simplified, sandboxed scripts which can be loaded safely without interfering with the base layer of the game.

using inheritance is also a good idea: e.g. adding a new block, most of the functionality probably exists on the base block class.

look at the powerpoint on blackboard for extra reading.